
Concepcion, “Reading Philosophy with Metacognition” (on Canvas) p. 358-367 
Phillips “The Ethics of Doxxing Nazi’s on Social Media”

Whitney Phillip’s thesis in this article is that naming and shaming fascists on social media is a complicated issue with justified arguments on both sides, but the focus should ultimately be on ways to effectively combat their beliefs and actions rather than on the fascists themselves. 

Main arguments in support of the thesis:
Misidentification can have serious consequences for individuals and deprive them of their ability to consent to what happens to their identity and reputation.
The media narrative should focus on how to effectively counter fascist ideologies and actions rather than on the fascists themselves.
People with ill intentions looking to create chaos or frame an opposing party can easily assume the role of an online vigilante.
People who participate in white supremacist demonstrations chose to protest at widely publicized events, with their faces exposed, and their personal information being made public is a consequence of that choice.
We must consider the impact of these actions on marginalized groups and be effective allies to them.

Objection/ critique: The article supports the belief that marginalized communities should not lead the fight against fascism. This diminishes marginalized communities' role and agency in confronting and countering fascism and white supremacy.

Reflection

I was unfamiliar with the term 'doxing,' so following Nozick's advice and methods made reading and analyzing Whitney Phillips' article easier and more efficient. To get the most out of it, I kept my expectations reasonable, knowing that I might not understand everything without some effort and that I might need to ask for help or clarification. Before making assumptions, I also made certain that I could state the author's conclusion and the gist of the argument for that conclusion. I highlighted sections of the article and took rough notes to better understand the premise of Phillip's argument.

In addition to these suggestions, I followed Nozick's 'three-part reading process,' which included Stage Setting, Active Reading, and Reviewing. I examined the general features of the article, such as the title, chronological order, and publication context, during the stage setting. The goal was to get a general idea of the topic of the article and to make sense of the individual sentences. I also skimmed the first and last paragraphs to see if there was a clear focal point or thesis statement. I actively engage with the text during active reading, highlighting and taking notes as needed. By following some of Nozick’s tips, I was able to better understand and retain the information from the article, evaluate the author's argument and come up with my personal opinion. 

I intend to use Nozick's method of reading philosophy thoroughly throughout the semester (especially flagging the material). Reading makes me sleepy, so I take breaks, sit somewhere where I won't be distracted, give myself enough time to read thoroughly, and even sit in an uncomfortable chair to avoid dozing off. I will also interact with the material by discussing it with my friends and classmates.
