Should the Use of Animals for Medical Research and Testing Be Banned?

In 2020, researchers tested mice in their efforts to develop a safe and viable vaccine for the SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) virus ("The Important Role"). They developed a special genetic variation of mice that could replicate the human protein to which the virus would bind. These “Mouse models” provided crucial knowledge about the virus’s symptoms and continue to be used by researchers to further understand COVID-19 disease ("The Important Role"). However, the use of animals in medical and scientific research has long been the subject of heated debate. 

On the one hand, animal testing has been the bedrock for most modern medical advancements such as developing the polio vaccines and testing blood transfusions and continues to prove beneficial in saving the lives of millions (“The Importance of Animal Research”). On the other, activist groups such as People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) condemn the practice by raising concerns over its immorality and lack of ethical judgement. The stance against the use of animals in research uses the argument that the practice is inhumane, unethical and fundamentally flawed as it infringes on basic animal rights. Alternatively, these opponents suggest the use of various other research methodologies to replace animal testing in laboratories entirely. However, as evident by the recent vote to ban animal testing in Switzerland being overwhelmingly shut down by those in favour (Revill), most medical research experts believe the alternatives still need more development to match the effectiveness and economic efficiency of animal testing. As this longstanding debate got renewed attention in Switzerland, the biggest underlying questions policymakers considered were -  Do the benefits of the practice outweigh the disadvantages and what some consider moral downfalls? Are human lives more important than the lives of the animals being used? Are there better alternatives we can defer to? More consequentially though, this debate raises the question - should the use of animals for medical research and testing be banned?

In Switzerland, a sweeping 79% of the voters opposed the referendum that suggested a complete ban on the practice (“Animal testing, Not all black and white”). Therefore, firstly, we must consider why animal testing has been utilized significantly in biomedical research in the past. According to medical researchers, the most fundamental reason against the ban is that animals are used in labs to conduct medical tests and studies that would be technically inviable, considered morally unacceptable or unethical to perform on human subjects (“The Importance of”). However, further arguments in support of animal testing are more deep-rooted and aim to prove why that practice is crucial and irreplaceable for biomedical advancements. According to Stanford Medicine, mammals such as mice and ape primates share as much as “98% of DNA with humans” and are susceptible to the same health disorders such as cancer, diabetes, heart diseases, etc. Today, animals continue being used to study “disease progressions, genetics, lifetime risk and other biological mechanisms” as they provide an ideal model for biological systems that are similar to humans (“The Importance of”). Life scientists in strong support of the practice argue that “nothing so far has been discovered” that can provide a substitute for how well the complex functions and organ systems in animals replicate the ones in humans and until then “tests on animals play a vital role” (Nuffield Council on Bioethics). 

As such, the reasons and explanations for conducting research on animals are often backed up by the medical advancements it has permitted and its benefits. It is argued that although penicillin was discovered without using animals, it was only found to be effective against infections in the body by testing it on mice (“Discovery and Development”). More recently, according to EFPIA, the data from animal testing significantly aided and expedited the process of producing vaccines for the COVID-19 virus as it “[gave] the vaccine manufacturers and regulators the evidence of safety needed to rapidly progress into larger human clinical trials” (“Fitting vaccine research”). However, animal rights activists and supporters of the ban on animal testing question the ethics, reliability, efficiency and overall need for the practice.

People against the use of animals argue that the practice is archaic and unnecessary. Activists argue that although the use of animals research has benefited humans, there is significant evidence that “human subjects have been harmed in the clinical testing of drugs that were deemed safe by animal studies,” (Van Norman). This case leads us to question the relevancy, accuracy and necessity of animal data in every medical research study. Over the years, concerns have mounted about how relevant animal experiments are to human health outcomes (Ferdowsian). According to animal rights activist PETA, several research papers that studied the relationship between animals and humans found that humans were not reliably replicated in animal clinical research. Additionally “recent systematic reviews of treatments for various clinical conditions” found that data from animal testing have been “poorly predictive of human outcomes in the fields of neurology and vascular disease” (Ferdowsian).

PETA further argues that the use of animals in laboratories is unjust and ethically wrong. Activists claim that the Animal Welfare Act (AWA) that governs the use of animals in laboratories in the U.S, allows animals to be “burned, shocked, poisoned, isolated, starved, forcibly restrained, addicted to drugs, and brain-damaged” (“These Answers to Arguments”). Although strides have been made in the protection of animals during research, the importance of the medical treatment being studied commonly takes precedence over the interests and rights of individual animals (Ferdowsian). There is a growing awareness and interest amongst scientists and ethicists about the pain and distress animals experience through invasive procedures, artificial diseases, social deprivation and loss of the ability to fulfil natural behaviours. This calls for more people around the world like authors like Kathleen Parker to condemn “our nation’s most-barbaric practices — mandatory animal testing of new pharmaceuticals”.  

Supporters of the ban instead suggest alternative methods that they think could well replace the need for animals to be tested. Kathleen Parker claims “sophisticated computer systems, mathematical models, human tissue and cell cultures and more focused clinical studies can also show us what happens to our bodies during disease infections”. For example, A research laboratory at Harvard University is developing a combination of “micro-fabrication techniques with modern tissue engineering”, which replicates the “biochemical and mechanical behaviours of the human lung” (Ferdowsian). These, paired with computer simulations, can mimic complex health conditions such as asthma, even though medicines developed using such techniques would still need to be tested on animals and humans. Furthermore, in the area of vaccine testing and development, many researchers have also started utilizing “human data and cell and tissue analysis” (Hartung, 195). 

However, despite these promising alternatives, many experts believe using animals to test still remains the fastest, most efficient and most reliable way to make advancements in medical research. Medical researchers believe that although new scientific, technological and software advances are helping develop these alternatives, the transition from animal testing to other methods is underway but animal testing is not yet fully replaceable (Jonker). According to Sonnet Jonker, “at this time, we have no way to delve into the deep biological underpinnings of how the brain drives reasoning, and emotion and organizes behaviour without studying animals, especially other primates.”. Amongst the group of people who believe that medical research without animal testing is not yet possible is the former CEO of the Medical Research Council, Prof Colin Blakemore, as he states that “[animals] are used only when no other species and no alternative approach can provide the answers to questions about such conditions as Alzheimer’s, stroke, Parkinson's, spinal injury, hormone disorders, and vaccines for HIV". 

In conclusion, I believe the use of animal testing should not be banned yet. Although we face a moral and ethical dilemma and there are clear downfalls to this practice, it seems as though there are significant benefits to animal testing for the growing medical needs of our society. As we explored with the COVID-19 pandemic example, extensive animal testing is attributed to the rapid development of the vaccine. The inclusion of animal testing in standardised research procedures and medical research guidelines has aided the incredible medical advancements made in the past and will continue to do so until the alternatives are being developed, perfected and made cost-effective.
Bibliography
100010509524078. “Editorial: Animal Testing, Not All Black and White.” DtNext.In, 23 Feb. 2022, https://www.dtnext.in/News/World/2022/02/23011402/1354990/Editorial-Animal-testing-Not-all-black-and-white.vpf.

“Alexander Fleming Discovery and Development of Penicillin - Landmark.” American Chemical Society, https://www.acs.org/content/acs/en/education/whatischemistry/landmarks/flemingpenicillin.html. Accessed 12 Apr. 2022.

“Answers to Common Arguments for Animal Testing.” PETA, 23 June 2010, https://www.peta.org/issues/animals-used-for-experimentation/animal-testing-bad-science/.

Balls, Michael. “Replacement of Animal Procedures: Alternatives in Research, Education and Testing.” Laboratory Animals, vol. 28, no. 3, July 1994, pp. 193–211. DOI.org (Crossref), https://doi.org/10.1258/002367794780681714.

“Finding Cures Faster: Bring the FDA into the 21st Century with Advanced Testing.” STAT, 4 Mar. 2022, https://www.statnews.com/2022/03/04/fda-animal-testing-rule-needs-update/.

Fitting Vaccine Research into One Year – Were Animals Used? https://www.efpia.eu/news-events/the-efpia-view/blog-articles/fitting-vaccine-research-into-one-year-were-animals-used/. Accessed 12 Apr. 2022.

“Opinion | Medical Development without Animal Testing Is the Goal, but We’re Not There yet.” Washington Post. www.washingtonpost.com, https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/11/02/medical-development-without-animal-testing-is-goal-were-not-there-yet/. Accessed 12 Apr. 2022.

“Opinion | Time to Rethink How We Use Animals to Test Pharmaceuticals.” Washington Post. www.washingtonpost.com, https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/10/08/its-barbaric-to-test-human-drugs-on-animals/. Accessed 12 Apr. 2022.

Proulx, Natalie. “Is Animal Testing Ever Justified?” The New York Times, 1 Oct. 2019. NYTimes.com, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/01/learning/is-animal-testing-ever-justified.html.

Revill, John. “Swiss Reject Ban on Animal Testing in Referendum.” Reuters, 13 Feb. 2022. www.reuters.com, https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/switzerland-vote-becoming-first-nation-ban-animal-testing-2022-02-13/.

Save the Animals: Stop Animal Testing |. https://www.lonestar.edu/stopanimaltesting.htm#:~:text=The%20harm%20that%20is%20committed,testing%20product%20toxicity%20are%20available. Accessed 12 Apr. 2022.

“Should Animals Be Used in Research?” Yourgenome, https://www.yourgenome.org/debates/should-animals-be-used-in-research. Accessed 12 Apr. 2022.

The Important Role of Animal Research in MRNA COVID-19 Vaccine Development | NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. https://www.niaid.nih.gov/news-events/role-animal-research-mrna-covid-19-vaccine-development. Accessed 12 Apr. 2022.

“We Don’t Need Animal Testing To Develop Effective Vaccines.” Faunalytics, 8 Mar. 2021, https://faunalytics.org/we-dont-need-animal-testing-to-develop-effective-vaccines/.

“Why Animal Research?” Animal Research at Stanford, https://med.stanford.edu/animalresearch/why-animal-research.html. Accessed 12 Apr. 2022.

