A response to seeing The Tempest performed in the Globe.

Yesterday, we visited Shakespeare’s Globe Theatre to watch The Tempest's new production; the experience was surreal. I was captivated by the act on stage because I had never before watched a theatre drama or play live in person. I admired the architecture and set decorations that surrounded me as I thought about how this once housed Shakespeare and all of his original play cast. I realised how the theatre and the art it represented. It withstood the test of time and devastating World Wars but also the fundamental cultural changes in London through the years. After learning about its original establishment, fire damage and relocation, being able to stand and witness one of the most famous plays in the world felt like a true privilege. Most of all, I was astonished by the amount of history, creativity and culture the Globe represented and the fact that I was able to experience it all through William Shakespeare’s work in the setting it was written to be played in. 

At the beginning of the play, there were quite a few monologues and lengthy expositions by Prospero. Although confusing at first, I was soon on par with the plot and storylines because read the synopsis and participated in discussions about the play earlier that day. Watching the highly qualified actors give the characters life, voice and personalities that I had only read about helped me understand the plot and all the ingenious nuances Shakespeare intended for his audience. I recognised that the play, like much of the arts and culture in London, is not stuck in the past. Director Sean Holmes and the extraordinary Globe Ensemble’s modern revival of the play had a striking new costume and set design and was filled with contemporary comedy along with references to social and cultural norms of the past. Watching a historic play by the most renowned English playwright made me realise that this city overflows with cultural, historical and artistic richness. The tempest has set an incredibly high bar for famous historic plays belonging to London that is showing in theatres presently. I can guarantee that I will be actively seeking out more opportunities to watch them by the end of the semester!

